https://texte.musiktexte.de/mt-142/29/generative-formung-aus-keimzellen-in-enno-poppes-herz-tier-wald-und-welt

MusikTexte 142 - August 2014, 63–74
From the smallest to the largest
Generative formation from germ cells in Enno Poppe's "Heart", "Animal", "Forest" and "World"
by Rainer Nonnenmann

I think it takes a lot of artistry to turn a sigh into a whole novel.

Enno Poppe 1

Since “Thema mit 840 Variationen” (Theme with 840 Variations) for piano (1993/1997), Enno Poppe has been composing with tiny cells, which he mostly derives from the structural and technical conditions of the instruments used. He was inspired to do this by his intensive preoccupation with the often only minimally varied patterns in the music of Morton Feldman and Hanspeter Kyburz. Like Poppe, he had studied composition with Gösta Neuwirth at the Berlin University of the Arts and began to work with generative forming processes from the smallest cells in his programmatic piece “Cells” for saxophone and ensemble (1993/1994). Similar to the chaining of atoms to form molecules and whole bodies, Poppe developed larger lines, textures, and textures from germ cells through microscopically precise and systematically comprehensive modifications. Moldings and complete pieces. In the absence of other terminology, he compared this way of working with the classic principle of motivic-thematic work, from which his scores differ significantly in terms of method and sounding result. Poppe understands “motivic-thematic work” as a material, among other things, that was not only available in classical music, but can be rethought today: “I first started working with cells, and only later realized that it might there is also a connection to tradition. In any case, I didn't go and said: I would like to take the traditional forms and see what they can do, or I take the sonata form and then somehow write a different type of sonata. It is exactly the opposite.I first developed the technique, working with cells, and then, due to the lack of vocabulary, only called it motivic-thematic work because I couldn't think of a better word. That was also meant as a provocation, because it is of course not a traditional motif-thematic work, but something else. "2

Instead of motifs or themes, Poppe is more concerned - according to Arnold Schönberg's term - with a kind of total “execution” in which larger connections arise in the course of process changes. As starting motifs he uses subthematic elementary events such as scales, repetitions, alternating notes, vibrati or glissandi, which, however, are just as concise as rhythmic-diastematic motifs - which are quite related to the core material of some movements of Beethoven's middle and late string quartets:Working with cells began with trying to clarify what I was actually working with during my studies. What is actually the smallest component? What could a musical cell or a musical atom be? What is the smallest possible unit from which music can be built? It really came out of the need to be clear about what I was actually working with. 3Instead of well-designed motifs, Poppe was concerned with the analysis of elementary basic material. Its treatment also differs from motivic-thematic work in that Poppe does not use the set elements as obligatory reference points, which he repeatedly resorts to, so that their substance more or less persists in all variations. Rather, following the example of the principle of developing variation favored by Brahms and Schönberg, the various variants are varied in such a way that the derivations move further and further away from the original material until they can hardly or no longer be associated with it. And even if the source material remains recognizable, it appears as something different in changed contexts.The derivation and combination processes result in formally effective processes which, not least of all, result in larger sections and molded parts by converting quantitatively increasing deviations into qualitatively new situations. Because the terms “motivic-thematic work”, “execution” and “variation” imply classical form formation, it would be easier to speak of “generative formation” in a neutral manner.

This designation is also more appropriate insofar as Poppe, following the example of serial thinking, aims for the most integral possible penetration of all details and the large form of a composition. To do this, he also uses predisposing structuring means and algorithmic procedures. On the one hand, it is a question of fractal series formations, which branch off an initial setting of rules or materials through continued self-similarity from outside to inside into smaller and smaller dimensions. On the other hand, he uses recursive methods, such as the growth rules and so-called "L-systems" from the book "The Algorithmic Beauty of Plants" (1990) by the Czech biologist Aristid Lindenmayer, the simplest germs and basic rules from the inside out into the greater and greater Let complexes grow.In both cases it is a matter of material and rule-setting, which from the beginning has a miniature shape that can be used again on a higher level as the material for further shaping. In the course of continued self-resemblance, the detail, structure and overall course of a work can be expanded apart generatively and connected to one another on all levels through both family relationships and variable diversity. Such interaction between part and whole turns the traditionally complementary poles of form-matter, form-technique and form-content into correlating reference levels of one and the same “generative formation”.In the course of continued self-resemblance, the detail, structure and overall course of a work can be expanded apart generatively and connected to one another on all levels through both family relationships and variable diversity. Such interaction between part and whole turns the traditionally complementary poles of form-matter, form-technique and form-content into correlating reference levels of one and the same “generative formation”.In the course of continued self-resemblance, the detail, structure and overall course of a work can be expanded apart generatively and connected to one another on all levels through both family relationships and variable diversity. Such interaction between part and whole turns the traditionally complementary poles of form-matter, form-technique and form-content into correlating reference levels of one and the same “generative formation”.Form-technique and form-content to correlate reference levels of one and the same "generative formation".Form-technique and form-content to correlate reference levels of one and the same "generative formation".

Poppe thus solves the old problem that, after the disintegration of tonal tension in the new music, there are no longer any binding types of form, but instead each piece has to develop its own course from its own material and structure, apart from canonized genre and form models. With regard to the serialism of the fifties and the post-serial sound composition of the sixties, Theodor W. Adorno took the view at the Darmstadt Summer Course in 1965: "Because there are no more forms, everything must become form." 4 Since form is determined by the material formed , Adorno understood - like Enno Poppe today - form, content and expression as mediated by one another, because ultimately “form in the current sense” is identical with the “totality of appearance” of music.5 At the same time, the identity of form and form harbors the risk that form will merge into the material structures without contributing anything to the constitution of the meaning and content of a work as an independent level of design. In order to prevent this, Poppe also understands form as an independent work dimension: It is very important that form belongs to the things that I invent myself. A form is always an idea. A certain piece also has a certain shape. I am extremely interested in developing all kinds of different kinds of shapes because I believe the way you hear music and perceive phenomena is extremely related to what shape it is. For example, I have a certain kind of sound, a certain oneSound idea or an idea of ​​gestalt formation that I would like to show the listener. And then I think about how to show it to him. That is part of the form - one should actually say dramaturgy. But sometimes it is also the case that a form idea is at the beginning and I have to see which sounds fit best so that this form idea becomes really clear with the help of the sounds.

As the discussion on form and formation shows, dealing with Poppe's music easily runs the risk of being too hasty to be satisfied with positivistic descriptions of the generative processes involved, instead of attempting on this basis, no less for the listening experience to grasp the essential expressive dimension and dramaturgy of this music. Like every musicological attempt at knowledge, the preoccupation with Poppe's music also has the task of recording the materials and modification principles used in the works as precisely as possible on the basis of the musical text and hearing impression, in order to create analytically sound and reasoned statements on a philologically secured basis through further contextualizations about the "sense" of this music.Since Poppe has not yet commented on the background, intentions and intentions of his works, there are no indications of any such attempts at interpretation. Investigations of his music therefore tend to be purely descriptive analyzes that adhere to the predisposing procedures and musical texts, compared to their ultimately meaningless, because purely positivistic findings, the interpretation of the mode of operation and meaning of this music is at the same time speculatively independent. In order not to fall prey to this dilemma, the following presentation of four of his works for strings does not tie in with the axiomatic positions, pre-structuring fractals or recursions - which Poppe has already described in lectures himself - but rather with the aesthetic level of appearance and experience of this music .

Liquefaction of the tonal space

In “Herz” for violoncello (2002) and “Tier” for string quartet (2002) a scale serves as the initial nucleus. "Wald" for four string quartets (2010) and "Welt" for large string orchestra (2012) are repetitions of the same pitch. The first two works show a clear genetic relationship. In contrast, “Welt” is an orchestration of “Wald” that is identical bar for bar. In addition, the two works, which were written ten years later, are linked to the two older ones through similar shaping principles and glissandos and micro-intervals that are particularly easy to realize on string instruments. In all four works, Poppe designs the musical space - exemplary for all of his work - as a basically infinite continuum that can be divided into infinitesimally small nuances.Thanks to the liquefaction of the tonal space for the purpose of reshaping it, his music breathes a wonderful freedom of invention and variability in detail and as a whole - with all the breadth and depth saturated with experience as well as compositional accuracy and structural complexity:I find it incredibly interesting to work with moving pitches, not to think of the sound as something fixed . I come even from the piano and am someday d been bored avon that I press always the same button almost like a button and always knows what comes out of a sound. Our entire western music theory is based on the fact that a pitch is a pitch, and that is always the same. There are many other ways of thinking this .

The four string compositions mentioned above also form a kind of “series of works” through the successive expansion of their line-up from solo cello to string quartet and quadruple quartet to large string orchestras. The number of available strings increases from piece to piece, from the cello, which initially only plays on a single string, to 4, 16, 64 and finally 240 strings. The exponentially growing quantities of players, instruments and strings lead to qualitatively different sounds, polyphonies and densities as well as - on changing reference levels - qualitatively new playing possibilities and degrees of order. Poppe's typically monosyllabic titles indicate the concatenation of these works: The organ "heart" is in the higher organism "animal", which finds its complex habitat in the biotope "forest", which in turn is part of the whole "world".Squaring the quartet in particular places the string quartet genre on a meta-level, in which either the four violas of the four quartets merge into a single viola part or the four cellists form their own cello quartet. In addition, the four quartets come together to form a superordinate four-part second degree, from which individual voices or partial quartets stand out all the more solo, especially in the otherwise chorus-based string orchestra arrangement. In addition to the relationships between individual voices and tutti or of the nucleus and the generative formation based on it, the process of composition and formation becomes recognizable as the actual theme of the music.in which either the four violas of the four quartets merge into a single viola part or the four cellists form their own violoncello quartet. In addition, the four quartets come together to form a superordinate four-part second degree, from which individual voices or partial quartets stand out all the more solo, especially in the otherwise chorus-based string orchestra arrangement. In addition to the relationships between individual voices and tutti or of the nucleus and the generative formation based on it, the process of composition and formation becomes recognizable as the actual theme of music.in which either the four violas of the four quartets merge into a single viola part or the four cellists form their own violoncello quartet. In addition, the four quartets come together to form a superordinate four-part second degree, from which individual voices or partial quartets stand out all the more solo, especially in the otherwise chorus-based string orchestra arrangement. In addition to the relationships between individual voices and tutti or of the nucleus and the generative formation based on it, the process of composition and formation becomes recognizable as the actual theme of the music.from which individual voices or partial quartets stand out all the more solo, especially in the otherwise chorus-based string orchestra arrangement. In addition to the relationships between individual voices and tutti or of the nucleus and the generative formation based on it, the process of composition and formation becomes recognizable as the actual theme of the music.from which individual voices or partial quartets stand out all the more solo, especially in the otherwise chorus-based string orchestra arrangement. In addition to the relationships between individual voices and tutti or of the nucleus and the generative formation based on it, the process of composition and formation becomes recognizable as the actual theme of the music.

What is striking about all four scores is the general rule non vibrato . With small lines between the noteheads, Poppe notices glissando lines that are expressly "to be understood as vibrati". To make this more precise, he writes verbatim in the scores of “Herz” and “Tier”: “Every single glissando passage combined with a legato slur can be articulated like a single, moving note. In addition, some individual tones are marked with vibr.designated. This should be heard clearly, but by no means parodic, as a different color. ”In the foreword of“ Wald ”and“ Welt ”about glissandi moving up and down quickly, it says,“ This action should be understood as an enlarged, rhythmically exact vibrato Poppe does not use the conventional vibrato game as a blanket espressivo that can be placed over any note, but as a special form of smoothly sliding pitches. By specifically composing the speed, ambitus, volume and articulation of this string-specific playing style and varying it according to all the rules of combinatorics, the "natural" vibrato between countless "artificial" vibrato variants now only appears as a rather improbable possibility among many others that also in their own way expressive,are gestural and structurally speaking.

Vibrato anatomy: "Heart"

The nucleus of “Herz” for violoncello (2002) is a four-tone group that undergoes transformations in the first three bars according to mechanisms that shape the further course. The one in measure 1 p  marcatoThe rising four-tone scale owes itself - according to Poppe's information on November 28, 2013 at the conference dedicated to him at the Hochschule für Künste Bremen - to the opening notes of the hit song "I lost my heart in Heidelberg", which in conjunction with the dedication of the piece "for Safia ”suggests an autobiographical background. At the same time, Poppe disguises this origin beyond recognition by directly modifying the fourth tone to a quarter tone with the second tone. In measure 2, the four-tone scale already appears transposed, expanded at intervals, dynamically increased and rhythmically-metrically augmented. In measure 3, the previous expansion of the parameters turns into a narrowing, because the four tones are reduced to the rhythmically diminished and decrescending tone change figure g - f sharp- g - f sharp . From the expansion extending into the outer pitch space, the principle of variation changes to the inner pitch space of micrologically fine details. The tone-changing figure is continuously continued in groups of four across the bar boundaries and is permanently changed: firstly, the pitches are modified to quarter-tones, secondly, they are given different durations in different meters, thirdly, their dynamics change, and fourthly, the point where the bow is painted alternates between ordinario and ponticello .

Separated by a dotted quarter rest, the piece starts again in bar 10 as at the beginning with the same three-fold transformation of the initial four-note group, as if the first nine bars were repeated. But as in Nicolaus A Huber's programmatically titled "the same is not the same" for snare drum (1978) according to Bertolt Brecht's dictum, the same is never the same in Poppe's music. In fact, the initial four-tone group now appears a whole tone higher and rhythmically minimally changed in three-four time. In bar 11, its original expanded form becomes a rhythmically varied play around the central tone gwhich leads directly to a tone-changing figure that is also transposed higher and rhythmically different, which in turn experiences various rhythmic, dynamic, intonational and technical variations up to bar 18. Again lifted by a pause, a third new beginning of the first nine bars begins in bar 19 with four other fundamental innovations: firstly, the initial four-note group is shortened and lengthened, secondly, the tone changes are played both legato and glissanding, and thirdly, tones with a slightly longer duration are vibratoplayed and fourth, in measure 26, the first double stops of thirds appear. The changes that have grown from measure to measure and from nine-measure phrase to nine-measure phrase finally reach an audible new quality. This is underscored by the envelope in another register in bar 27.

As with classical-romantic theme formations and sentence openings with the three-step phrase, phrase continuation and modification, Poppe "exposes" his material and its development principles in three attempts in order to then freely combine the two. In the following, the tone changing figure - in turn a reduction of the initial four-tone cell - experiences various rhythmic and interval extensions, so that virtuoso "art vibrati" arise. The cello not only oscillates between two adjacent pitches, but also quickly glides up and down between increasingly divergent pitches. The amplitudes of these well-composed vibrati range from thirds and fifths to ninths and almost double octaves. The phenomenologist Poppe looks at the vibrato as if under a magnifying glass (see music example).He not only takes a general look at seemingly simple things on their surface, but also shows them with an analytical in-depth look in their actual complexity: “My musical cells always have all parameters at once - even a single tone. Every single atom of music is already complex. There is nothing that is not complex. "6th

The extreme glissando spikes go to the limit of what is playable and, precisely because of the latent excessive demands on the performer, unfold an intensity that the listener communicates as a dramatic exclamation. In addition, the position is a good example of what Poppe calls “density of change”: “In the motivic-thematic work, I find it particularly exciting that you recognize and that you can observe how things change, how a network of similarities changes results. Back then, I invented the term density of change for myself. The point is that a piece remains constant with regard to one parameter and changes significantly on another. All of this has something to do with perception, and therefore with comprehensibility. ” 7 In“ Herz ”the way of playing remains vibratoconstant, while the pitch parameter changes all the more. As a result, the cellist takes on adventurous rolling courses which, despite all the changes, can still be understood as extremely enlarged vibrati.

All dynamics, tempo, sound and register changes - apart from an unbelievable variance in detail - also have a form-forming effect, insofar as they develop certain sections or - in Stockhausen's sense - characteristic "moments" with one or more dominant main properties. Poppe's generative formations differ from Stockhausen's momentary form, however, in that they have a clearly defined beginning and end as well as a clearly directed dramaturgy. In “Herz” the part of the soloist appears like a single, permanently changing line, in which the pitches, as in oriental, East Asian and especially Korean music - which Poppe began to hear with enthusiasm in the nineties - fluctuate permanently and into subsequent notes hand off:I am very influenced by Korean music. There is the idea that no tone should be the same as the other, but that everyone is perceived as a living being or entity, and the musician should even intone the same pitch differently when it comes back, a little higher or lower, with one another vibrato or glissando. That way, music becomes much more lively and diverse. Based on this preoccupation with Korean music, I asked myself the question in connection with the work with germ cells: Where is a tone still another tone, and when does it become a shape, for example when he makes a glissando or a back and forth Move. For example, a tone with vibrato would still be a tone that has vibrato. But what happenswhen the vibrato becomes very slow and has a very large ambitus? Is it still a single note or is it already a shape? And how do I get a continuum between a clearly delimited atomic pitch and this moving tone? I try to have a lot of flexibility and a wide range of very different ways of understanding the tone myself.

The concept of "ornament", which is central to the art and culture of the Arab world, does not apply to Poppe's music. In contrast to the distinction between elementary musical composition and additional ornamentation - as is done in traditional Western music theory - in his works the movements of the lines cannot be distinguished from their substance. After all, all the vibrations and fluctuations are what make up the core of his music. In this sense, right at the beginning of “Heart”, the initial four-tone scale and alternating note figure are transformed, expanded and shortened so that from the beginning there is no longer any solid substance that could be ornamented. Nevertheless, this first four-tone positing remains recognizable through all metamorphoses as a cohesive "unity in plurality" (Hegel):“I get very close to the material. If I use a cell as a motif, then a simple glissando can already be a motif. That said, if I hang 25 glissandi of this type in a row, it will still sound like thematic work. I find this an incredibly interesting process, because I have several such small objects that I can assemble in different ways - and yet something like connection arises. The reason for this lies in the high recognition of my objects. I am particularly interested in that. [...] It becomes more and more clear to me that it is not about the amount of ideas, but about the attention - the attention when observing. "That said, if I hang 25 glissandi of this type in a row, it will still sound like thematic work. I find this an incredibly interesting process, because I have several such small objects that I can assemble in different ways - and yet something like connection arises. The reason for this lies in the high recognition of my objects. I am particularly interested in that. [...] It becomes more and more clear to me that it is not about the amount of ideas, but about the attention - the attention while observing. "That said, if I hang 25 glissandi of this type in a row, it will still sound like thematic work. I find this an incredibly interesting process, because I have several such small objects that I can assemble in different ways - and yet something like connection arises. The reason for this lies in the high recognition of my objects. I am particularly interested in that. [...] It becomes more and more clear to me that it is not about the amount of ideas, but about the attention - the attention when observing. "which I can assemble in different ways - and yet something like connection arises. The reason for this lies in the high recognition of my objects. I am particularly interested in that. [...] It becomes more and more clear to me that it is not about the amount of ideas, but about the attention - the attention when observing. "which I can assemble in different ways - and yet something like connection arises. The reason for this lies in the high recognition of my objects. I am particularly interested in that. [...] It becomes more and more clear to me that it is not about the amount of ideas, but about the attention - the attention while observing. "8th

"Heart" consists of three shaped parts according to the classic fast-slow-fast scheme. As in Poppe's cycle “Speicher” (2008–2013), this three-part structure is possibly due to a fractal transfer of the temporal proportions of the first three four-tone groups of bars 1 to 3 (with a significantly slower middle group) to the large form. Form parts I and II differ in a clear change of tempo, while part II seamlessly forms part IIItransforms. In the first part, pitched and “very articulate” tone sequences, alternating with flowing glissando and legato parts, drive into higher and higher registers, up to bar 127 the cellist from the highest string - on which he has so far played almost exclusively - to the The lowest string changes to the happening in a tempo quarter = 144 another octave up to fi s 3to screw up. From here - at the beginning of the middle section - there is a change to the low register and a much slower tempo quarter = 48 (see sheet music example). In contrast to the previously extremely variable and forced playing styles, the violoncello is now allowed to develop its soft baritone melt and play longer notes with conventional vibrato, so that traditional expressivity flashes in places. Then the tempo, which has been gradually increased from Viertel = 60 through 72 to 90, continues seamlessly into the fast final section, which - in a reprise-like connection to Part I - increases again in the highest positions. After abruptly dissonant double ninth stops increased to fff, the piece finally ebbs away with an absolute top note b 3 ascending and at the same time "al niente" diminishing tone change figure.

Contrary to the descriptive title of the work, “Herz” does not show any steady pulse. Instead, the solo piece thrives on an extraordinary variety of rhythms, metrics and articulation. Instead of steady heartbeats, Poppe aims, on the contrary, for greater changeability and volatility, for which the heart also stands as a poetic symbol for temperament, feeling, exuberance, love, expression and intimacy. This is also underlined by the numerous expressive instructions : espressivo, pesante, very excited and ugly, scherzando, ff erupting, coarse, dolce, rigid, non vibr., Ma molto espressivo.In addition to Poppe's subtle reference to his love experience in Heidelberg, the term “heart” ultimately also refers to the vibrato playing style of string instruments, which is most associated with emotion and expression. Although this highly standardized espressivo style of playing appears only selectively, its inner workings are analytically projected outwards onto the entire pitch range of the cello from C over five octaves to b 3 through systematic variation of all its parameters : fully composed anatomy in the open heart.

The quartet as quadrupeds: "animal"

After “Herz”, Poppe could easily have named other works with other organs, with lungs, liver, stomach, spleen, intestines or brain? Although these parts of the body are less poetic than the heart, they are no less expressive in terms of their nature and vital functionality. With multiple associations and analogies, they too could have shed light on the materials, structures and shaping principles of the respective pieces. Meanwhile, Poppe joined a series with “Oil” (2001-2004), “Salt” (2005), “Grapes” (2004/2005), “Gold” (2006) and “Bread” (2007/2013) Works carry different substances of different consistency, origin and use in the title. However, prior to “Herz”, “Bones” for Ensemble (1999/2000) had already been written, and later other works with “body-conscious” titles followed:the related instrumentation “sweat” for violoncello with keyboard (2010) as well as the currently still in progress pieces “hair” for violin solo (2013/2014) and “fur” for percussion solo (2013/2014), whose titles are also specific components name of the instruments used. Poppe also chose a physical title for “Tier” for string quartet (2002). The animal title collides with everything that the string quartet genre has stood for since its creation in the mid-eighteenth century and continues to do so today: spirit, wit, innovation, bourgeoisie, humanity, the highest level of artistry and that cultivated culture of conversation and entertainment that Goethe introduced in 1829 in a letter to Zelter with his famous dictum about the string quartet:"You can hear four sensible people talking to each other". But Poppe calls his quartet "animal" of all things!

As with “Heart”, the beginning of “Tier” clearly defines a concise basic element (see note example): a five-tone scale made up of four ascending tones and a falling tone, which is similar to the first five tones of “Herz”. As there, this starting cell immediately experiences various rhythms, transpositions, expansions and shortenings. “Heart” proves to be the driving force behind the sister work, which was completed three and a half months later. In fact, according to his own information, Poppe used material here that he had already generated for the cello solo piece but had not used there. It therefore corresponds to the same code and, in addition to the material, the structural and formal relationship between the two pieces.Like a quotation-like disclosure of the parallel to “Heart”, the scale is played in measure 1/2 by the solo violoncello. The pitchesg - gk - ais - h and (vierteltönig increased) a directly subsequent to a mikrointervallisch and rhythmically modified chord progression. In bars 3 to 5, the five-note sequence is expanded to five five-part chords (with double stops on the first violin), the duration of which increases successively from four sixteenths to five, six and seven sixteenths. At the very beginning of bar 1, however, there is a combination of four variations of this five-tone motif: a rapid changeover glissando of the first violin, five single-tone repetitions of the second violin, as an initial impulse a Bartók pizzicato of the cello on A flat ,which finally continues the viola seamlessly with a glissanding third double stop. As in “Herz”, Poppe exposes not only the raw material, but also its processing principles.

However, neither “heart” nor “animal” can be referred to as an “exposition” in the sense of the classical sonata form. Although the reference to the original material is retained at the beginning of “Tier”, the further course of it moves away from it more and more. Bar 6 corresponds to bar 1 with some transposed, rhythmically modified and rearranged elements. Furthermore, the isolated five-note chord in bars 7/8 is a splitting off of the chord progression in bars 3-5, the chain of which it continues at the same time. The Bartók pizzicato of the cello at the end of bar 8 and the subsequent single-tone repetitions, alternating note and double-fingering glissandi of the other strings fall back on bar 1 as well as its first modification in bar 6 (as there with five alternating tones in first violin instead of four as in measure 1).The principles of variation and evolving variation overlap. In addition, the cello begins earlier with the scale movement and continues it - again with rhythmic variations - to the pizzicato of the second violin at the end of bar 9, the third reference to the original material and its previous modifications. The fourth recourse from bar 11 is followed in bars 12/13 in addition to the solo scale of the cello and its two chord variants as before in bars 2 to 5. Contrary to the original augmentation of the five-part chords, their duration is now successively from five sixteenths to four and three sixteenths shortened and only then from bar 15 lengthened all the more to ten and finally even eighteen sixteenths.In the meantime, the alternating-tone glissandi and (partly also glissanding) pizzikati break away from their previous integration into the initial combination.

In the further course of “Tier”, the elements introduced so far remain present and more or less recognizable. Poppe's string quartet thus follows the ideal of material condensation with which the genre has been linked since Haydn's opus 33. At the same time, individual materials and ways of playing develop a life of their own that brings out characteristic passages: for example, single-tone repetitions from bar 37 and microtonal double-fingered glissandi from bar 100. The reference to the original material is gradually becoming looser through permanent modification. Finally, all four voices rise in higher and higher registers until the action suddenly changes into a new state in bars 126/127 (see note example). The fall of almost three octaves to unison a (as in "Heart") is marked with the change fromfortissimo to piano as well as from Tempo Viertel = 120 to 54 the beginning of the slow middle section.

A paradigm shift also occurs at this point in terms of composition: the previous polyphony is followed by a large solo of the cello (up to bar 147), which the other strings only occasionally accompany or replace. In addition (as in “Heart”) there are longer recumbent tones with “natural” vibrato and express vibr. dolceso that the tone of traditional quartet music can be heard involuntarily. At the same time, there are also various "artificial" vibrato variants. As the tempo of the pitch fluctuations slows down or accelerates extremely, the tones either begin to “hover” or to whir like electronically. And as the ambitus of the glissandi increases from a quarter tone to a ninth, instead of uniform vibrations, furious excursions also arise. Purely quantitative modifications of the size of the interval and the frequency of vibration produce completely new sound qualities. The wild gestures and acrobatic sledding courses are hardly reminiscent of conventional vibrato, even if they grow from it.

Poppe's art of variation and combination, with all its systematics and precise attention to detail, does not aim at direct affective expression. Nevertheless, the lines and structures of his generative forms in places seem like speaking gestures. Depending on the direction, dynamics, tempo and articulation, the glissandi, which vary between micro-intervals and maximum deflections, have a cheering, enticing, howling, sighing or plaintive effect, as in the linguistic articulation-oriented music by Salvatore Sciarrino. In addition, the contrasting degrees of density and energy states are communicated as moments of rest or excitement. Even if Poppe does not aim at certain expressions, for him music is absolutely inconceivable without expression:I am convinced that there can be no expressionless music because music is always about expression and energetic processes. I actually find the traditional vibrato tone comparatively less expressive, because it is so conventional and we have agreed on it: This is a sign of expression. That interests me least of all. I am interested in what different types of espressivo can come from and what. When composing myself, I am more or less expressive by screamingSit at the table and try to touch all of these sounds and imagine them in what they convey. Art is always communication, the music says something and speaks to the audience not with terms, but through its expressiveness. In music what me is always interested Except voice Liche. That something is expressed what one nic with words ht can express. We have so many possibilities of small values ​​in music, and we can give each tone a slightly different character, just as facial expressions , for example , have an incredible number of facets than wordscould call. And it is precisely this flexibility of expression that interests me. I don't need to tell a story or semantics. A verbal description would always be a reduction.

The title "Tier", strangely different from the string quartet genre, could allude to the downright creatural linguistic quality of many parts of this work. A four-legged friend could also be meant whose extremities - in analogy to the four independent voices - lead their own life and at the same time help one and the same organism to move in a coordinated manner: the string quartet as quadrupeds.

Quadrature of the quartet: "Forest"

In “Wald” for four string quartets (2009/2010) Poppe expands the string quartet's strictly codified formation by quadrupling it into something new. Giacinto Scelsi had already undertaken something similar when he had his Quartetto N o 3 (1963) and Quartetto N o 4 (1964) expanded for a multiple of the original line-up, namely to "Ohoi" for sixteen strings (1966) and "Natura renovatur" for eleven strings (1967). Iannis Xenakis' “Aroura ”for twelve strings (1971), whose parabolic glissand lines diverging and overlapping at different speeds, like in Xenakis' famous orchestral work“ Metastaseis ”(1953/1954), are based on mathematical principles and stochastic models. For reasons similar to Xenakis and Scelsi, Poppe also chose an extended string line-up, whose infinitely variable glissandi, microtonal fluctuations and dense cluster formations promote the liquefaction of the tonal space he intended. At the same time, he aims to properly square the quartet: “My musical research always has to do with standards, enlargements and reductions.In a work on the subject of a string quartet, I would firstly like to take the microscope and view every musician with his four strings as a quartet. At the same time, the ensemble is quadrupled into a kind of metaset technique. With sixty-four strings. "9 On the one hand, “Wald” preserves the composition of the four string quartets, which on the stage face the audience in blocks in a semicircle. On the other hand, the 4 x 4 = 16 musicians with their total of sixty-four strings enable completely different types of interaction and texture formation.

This time, the starting material is repetitions in which glissandi of different speeds, directions, dimensions, combinations and densities are pushed. We start with the four violas. In the order 4, 1, 2, 3 they insert pp with the same pitch c , but all with different durations and at different beats. As in “Speicher I ” for a large ensemble (2009/2010), which was created at the same time, Poppe starts with “the simplest possible motif that I have ever used: just a single viola note”. 10In “Wald” the four violas overlap to form a single continuous single-tone repetition. Apparently just simple repetitions of the same note, it is actually an extremely complex temporal and spatial phenomenon. Because the sequence of tones fluctuates in time and twitches spatially through all four quartets on the stage. The asynchronous time and multiple sound space coordinate system of the further course of the piece experiences a meaningful opening.

Already in bar 2/3 the diatonic-chromatic pitch space is exploded by means of a microintervallic spread and glissanding cluster, which resembles the glissanding third double fingering of the viola at the beginning of "Tier" and becomes a huge one in the last quarter of "Wald" Tutti-Glissando will grow out. The microglissando there expands to the macroglissando. As with the violas before, the four string quartets now set one after the other in series IV, I, II, IIIone. The quartets play their first cluster assignment synchronously, but all further assignments diverge. As a reaction to the first asynchronous cluster of Quartet IV (bars 4/5), the fourth viola (bar 6) combines its previous single-tone repetition (now raised to quarter-tones) with the glissando of the cluster and modifies its previous sul ponticello to ordinario and vibrato ( Measure 6). Conversely, the other players from Quartet IV take actionthe previous synchronicity of the first cluster in the form of synchronous tutti repetition, which the four violas had previously played asynchronously. The technical paradigms are swapped. As in “Herz” and “Tier”, not only are all the original materials of the piece exposed, but also the basic temporal and spatial principles in all possible combinations: singularity and repetition, punctuality and continuity, monotony and polychrome, fixed and sliding pitch, synchronicity and Asynchronicity.

As a combination of monotony and continuity, from bar 13 onwards, unison tones spread over four octaves set in. According to the obligatory sequence IV, I, II , III , these increasing and decreasing unisonos rise from e to a four-tone increased f (bar 19), g (bar 22) and quarter-tone raised g (bar 23). With every repetition of the unison principle, a clearly directed shift in the pitch space occurs at the same time. In addition, the interval between the inserts is shortened from seven to four bars and finally to one bar, so that the last two unisonos overlap and suddenly something completely different arises: a quarter-tone beat between the quartetsII and III . The sequence of isolated individual events leads to formally effective units, contexts, contrasts and further developments. And as here, minimal modifications in space and time also result in complete transformations of the sounding result.

Overlapping with the unison tones, the quartets begin from bar 20 according to the scheme IV, I, II,  III with four-part textures. Since the last two entries in bar 28 occur almost simultaneously, they overlap to form a new eight-part set. This increased polyphony gradually encompasses the entire apparatus. A combinatorial new formation of cluster, glissando and reclining sound can be found from bar 35 in Quartet II. It is a recumbent chord, the individual notes of which slowly glissand up a quarter or semitone over the duration of three bars. This glissando with minimal ambitus and maximum temporal stretching is followed by the exact opposite from bar 42 in the context of small solo interludes of the first violins: glissandi that are compressed in time and extend at intervals. While the elongated change in pitch was barely noticeable before, rhythmic acceleration and interval spreading of the same style of playing result in completely different impulsive gestures and, depending on the sense of direction, different linguistic intonation curves.

In the further course the four string quartets alternately form double, triple and quadruple quartets as well as solo and tutti constellations and multi-choir juxtapositions. From bar 51, all sixteen individual voices canonically play the same melody lines, each with a different rhythm, so that, as in Ligeti's “Atmosphères”, a hyperpolyphonic overall texture is created. Subsequently, the four string quartets are staggered in blocks and form hoquetus-like changes and an overarching four-part second degree. From bar 100 the four cellists come together to form a quartet of their own, which meets selectively in unanimous actions ( e.g. at the beginning of bar 103 in the common starting cell B and quarter-tone raised B), in order to then fan out into four voices by means of different glissandos and interval chains. Poppe's squaring of the quartet enables changing meta-structures with sometimes unusual combinations and axes. From bar 133, all four violas are lined up to form a single continuous viola solo, which only in bar 141 branches from a short unison intersection of the second and third violas to real two-part music and in bar 157 to complete four-part music. In measure 178 the viola solo, which meanders through all four quartets, jumps into the first violin of Quartet IIIwhich initially as a soloist and from bar 191 in a duo with the first violin of Quartet IV - which here takes on the role of second violin, so to speak - dominates the event. And while Quartets II, III and IV pause from bar 206 , Quartett I appears as a solo quartet with a chord progression from which the viola emerges as a soloist. Depending on the reference level, like a Russian doll, there is a solo in the solo and a quartet in the other.

In the middle of the 557-bar piece, from bar 282, all sixteen strings suddenly play the same chain of intervals in exactly the same way. In view of the other polyphony, this insert works like a unison, although it is an eight-note cluster. The following passage takes up a three-tone figure again (after first anticipations from bar 133), in which the frame interval of the minor third is divided exactly in the middle by a three-quarter tone. The three-quarter tone scale on which the entire piece is based crystallizes here. Poppe uses such a scale in several pieces because it causes a different tonality without the major thirds, perfect fourths and fifths typical of the major-minor system. The same three-tier figure appears in "Suitcase" for a large ensemble (2011/2012),“Cabinet” for nine musicians (1989/2009) and “Speicher” for a large ensemble (2008–2013). The “poppesque” titles of these works are due to differently dimensioned storage options of increasingly higher order and indicate - like the four string works - the material relationship of these pieces. In “Wald” Poppe twists and turns from the same three-tone cell for almost two hundred bars over and over again with new variations and alternating arcs of melodies.In “Wald” Poppe twists and turns from the same three-tone cell for almost two hundred bars over and over again with new variants and alternating melodies.In “Wald” Poppe twists and turns from the same three-tone cell for almost two hundred bars over and over again with new variants and alternating melodies.

Only the final section from bar 449 frees itself from the obsessive three-tone figure. Individual glissandi of different lengths combine to form a continuous giant glissando of the entire ensemble. The permanent gliding of all voices leads to constant shifts and suddenly flashing major and seventh spectral chords, which increase the upward pull through harmonic-cadential tensions. The voices and vocal groups screw themselves up to the shrillest heights through overlapping new beginnings until all the strings (including the cellos up to ai s 3 ) under a quarter-tone raised b 4 as the top note are rhythmically livened up by increasingly faster repetitionsmolto vibrato whirring bitonal E / F sharp major final sound , which finally decrescends quickly al niente from the fffff . Like “heart” and “animal”, “forest” ends after the culminating third part with an abruptly dusky end.

The title “forest” describes a complex habitat in which different individuals and communities of organisms coexist in mutually dependent relationships. The sixteen individual voices also act autonomously in various soloistic as well as string quartets or pure viola and cello quartets et cetera in polyphonic and homophonic textures as in different "biotopes". The dark title of the work means this labyrinthine thicket of intertwined voices, all of which act as soloists and yet develop orchestral richness of sound together. Perhaps, however, “forest” also means very tangibly - as in “wood solo” for clarinet or bassoon (2000/2004) - the construction material of the sixteen string instruments, which in fact bring a lot of “wood” to the stage.

Biosphere widening: "World"

“World” for large string orchestra (2010/2011) is a bar for bar identical re-instrumentation of the recently created “Wald”. The close relationship between the two works can already be heard in the titles, which only differ by two small shifts in sound: “Forest” becomes “World”. The two most striking differences are the choral scoring of the individual voices previously recorded as soloists and the additional fifth part of the double basses, which, apart from a few deviating pitches, run largely parallel to the cellos. As the string orchestra, like the four quartets, consists of four groups of the same size from the line-up 4.3.3.3.2 placed side by side on the stage and four soloists each sit as close to the front as possible,the four quartets of “Wald” remain to some extent contained in the orchestral expansion of “Welt”. The fact that Poppe sees the four orchestral groups as separate units is also signaled by his urgent recommendation in the score to first “conduct a three-hour individual rehearsal with each of the four orchestral groups” before the tutti rehearsals.

The expansion of the quadruple quartet to a string orchestra serves, on the one hand, to make the playing technique easier. For example, quarter-tone intonation and additional glissanding double stops can be performed much better by two players with one glissando each instead of one player. On the other hand, the choral line-up, including double basses, aims to expand the color palette and ambitus as well as denser textures, clusters, tonal masses and stronger contrasts between solos and tutti. For example, from bar 51 between glissanding tutti clusters, the sixteen-part canonical passage is played exactly as in "Wald" only by the sixteen solo partsso that the previous tutti passage - without anything being changed about it - now suddenly appears as a solo sequence of four times four soloists due to the larger frame of reference of the orchestra. In contrast, the former quartet of four cellists from bar 100 becomes a quartet of four solo double basses, which play the same part an octave lower and thereby greatly change the character of the passage.

The melody wandering from one viola to the other from bar 133 is contrasted with block-like quartet and tutti inserts until the relationship is reversed and the three-tone motifs of the violas marcato into the solo quartets and from bar 163 into individual tutti orchestral partshike. The motif of the minor third and three-quarter tone, which has been varied over and over again by the violas and henceforth appearing in the most varied of expansions and foreshortenings, is emphasized more clearly in this way than in “Wald”. The violin solo from bar 181 and the violin duo from bar 191 also work with sharper contrasts between solos and tutti. The orchestration also plays an important role in the final section, where the constantly rising and falling voices push each other higher and higher and unite with their choral ensemble develop even stronger suction. The final sound, screwed to the highest register , does not fade away like in “Wald”, but is unabated by the tutti fffff  molto vibratoheld to suddenly crash almost three octaves in a steep glissando. The sound, energetically tense to the point of bursting, experiences a veritable implosion. Poppe thus underlines the difference between “world” by tearing off the final excerpts that extend from “heart” to “animal” and “forest” through all the final sections of this series of works in high positions.

Although bar for bar is identical, the four times as strong orchestra develops a completely different dynamic and charisma in terms of performance compared to the quadruple quartet. This is shown by the fact that the theoretically identical duration of both pieces leads to great differences in practice. The sixty strings of the Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra needed a full four minutes longer for the world premiere of “Welt” than the performance of “Wald” by the Hamburg Ensemble Resonanz. Although not justified by anything in the score, the larger apparatus acquired the extra time it needed, as if it were following the physical law of the inertia of mass. In view of the performers who are well acquainted with new music, it would be rashto understand the longer duration of the performance one-sidedly as an interpretative deficiency. Rather, it also provides an indication of the artistic intention and effectiveness of Poppe's orchestration. Because instead of subjecting all parameters to extensive modifications, as usual, in this case he only multiplies the number of players and still arrives at a different music in terms of mass, color, energetics, tension as well as micro and macro time. Since here, too, mere quantity turns into quality, Poppe's re-instrumentation from “forest” to “world” also proves to be a variant of the idea of ​​generative shaping or reshaping of music, which is central to his work.Because instead of subjecting all parameters to extensive modifications, as usual, in this case he merely multiplies the number of players and still arrives at a different music in terms of mass, color, energetic, tension, and micro and macro time. Since here, too, mere quantity turns into quality, Poppe's re-instrumentation from “forest” to “world” also proves to be a variant of the idea of ​​generative shaping or reshaping of music, which is central to his work.Because instead of subjecting all parameters to extensive modifications, as usual, in this case he only multiplies the number of players and still arrives at a different music in terms of mass, color, energetics, tension as well as micro and macro time. Since here, too, mere quantity turns into quality, Poppe's re-instrumentation from “forest” to “world” also proves to be a variant of the idea of ​​generative shaping or reshaping of music, which is central to his work.Poppe's re-instrumentation from “forest” to “world” also proves to be a variant of the central idea of ​​the generative formation or reshaping of music, which is central to his work.Poppe's re-instrumentation from “forest” to “world” also proves to be a variant of the central idea of ​​the generative formation or reshaping of music, which is central to his work.

In contrast to “heart”, “animal” and “forest”, whose titles name all organisms increasingly higher degrees of order, “world” means the totality that Ludwig Wittgenstein defined in his “Tractatus logico-philosophicus” (1922) with the famous opening sentence : "The world is everything that is the case." The boundaries of this allness were pushed further and further in the course of increasing human possibilities of knowledge. If world initially only meant the immediate lifeworld of man, it gradually expanded to the whole earth, to the cosmos and finally to the universe. In view of this expansion to the largest and most comprehensive in each case, Immanuel Kant understood the term “world” to be only a regulative idea of ​​pure reason, which has its value as an orientation aid, but which does not correspond to any real view.since the world can neither be experienced as a single nor as a whole. The same applies to music in general, which can never be perceived as a whole, but always only as a result of countless individual now-points. The same applies to Poppe's music, which generates each piece as its own macrocosm through micrologically fine variations of the smallest elementary events. And the same applies in particular to Poppe's composition “Welt”, the musical cosmos of which includes the previous work “Wald”, which in turn puts the string quartet “Tier” on a higher level thanks to its four-fold quartet, which in turn gives its initial impulse to the cello piece “Heart”. owes.but always only as a result of countless individual now points. The same applies to Poppe's music, which generates each piece as its own macrocosm through micrologically fine variations of the smallest elementary events. And the same applies in particular to Poppe's composition “Welt”, the musical cosmos of which includes the previous work “Wald”, which in turn puts the string quartet “Tier” on a higher level thanks to its four-fold quartet, which in turn gives its initial impulse to the cello piece “Heart”. owes.but always only as a result of countless individual now points. The same applies to Poppe's music, which generates each piece as its own macrocosm through micrologically fine variations of the smallest elementary events. And the same applies in particular to Poppe's composition "Welt", the musical cosmos of which includes the previous work "Wald", which in turn puts the string quartet "Tier" on a higher level thanks to the four-fold quartet, which in turn gives its initial impulse to the cello piece "Herz" owes.which for its part puts the string quartet “Tier” on a higher level through the fourfold line-up, which in turn owes its initial impulse to life to the cello piece “Heart”.which for its part puts the string quartet “Tier” on a higher level through the fourfold line-up, which in turn owes its initial impulse to life to the cello piece “Heart”.

the same is not the same

The fully composed vibrato variants of the string compositions “Heart”, “Animal”, “Forest” and “World” can also be found in other works by Poppe, not least in his music theater and vocal works, above all the solo piece “Wespe” for voice, which is based exclusively on glissandi solo (2005). Sliding and vibrating pitches characterize Poppe's overall personal style. With the exception of his early “Thema mit 840 Variationen” (1993/1997), he typically did not compose for piano, whose distinct chromatic scale he preferred to replace with keyboards with microtonally liquefied pitches. There is something genotypic about the fact that everything in his music fluctuates, oscillates, vacillates, changes and ceaselessly reproduces. It corresponds to the body and character of this musician, the way he speaks,Moving and conducting impulsively as well as gesturally concise. After all, at the Bremen conference Poppe himself referred to the physical feel of his composing: "The music I write always goes through my voice, through my hands and my body."

If the examination of Poppe's music is not to be limited to mere descriptions of its materials, techniques and forms of development, but also to say something about its expressive content and effect, then - as requested at the beginning - one should also ask about its "meaning". This cannot be met otherwise than through a correlation of external and internal musical sense. Although in Poppe's works everything is related to everything through the same starting material and the generative development process applied to it, nothing is identical with one another. No detail corresponds exactly to the other. Or, according to Bertolt Brecht: "the same is not the same". Rather, all the details are individually different due to constant variation.This variance in permanence turns every tone into an unmistakably unique and complex phenomenon that is individually composed of various parameters. And that's exactly why Poppe's music opens eyes and ears. Each of his pieces is an impressive artistic plea for otherness, differentiation, changeability, diversity, fantasy and - as Adorno would have said - the “non-identical”. Thereby something vegetative, growing and organic is suitable for the variable propagation, folds and ramifications, as if they had been copied from nature. In fact, the fractals and recursive methods used are similar to the laws of crystal and plant growth.Each of his pieces is an impressive artistic plea for otherness, differentiation, changeability, diversity, fantasy and - as Adorno would have said - the “non-identical”. Thereby something vegetative, growing and organic is suitable for the variable propagation, folds and ramifications, as if they had been copied from nature. In fact, the fractals and recursive methods used are similar to the laws of crystal and plant growth.Each of his pieces is an impressive artistic plea for otherness, differentiation, changeability, diversity, fantasy and - as Adorno would have said - the “non-identical”. Thereby something vegetative, growing and organic is suitable for the variable propagation, folds and ramifications, as if they had been copied from nature. In fact, the fractals and recursive methods used are similar to the laws of crystal and plant growth.Indeed, the fractals and recursive procedures used are similar to the laws of crystal and plant growth.In fact, the fractals and recursive methods used are similar to the laws of crystal and plant growth.

Poppe's formations generate self-similarities on all levels of order, like a tree whose trunk widens to a crown, whose branches divide into smaller twigs, whose leaves fan out into ever finer veins. The structures of the largest correspond to the structures of the smallest. And just as no two leaves of a tree are alike, but each one has a slightly different shape, size, color and vein structure based on the same genetic code, nothing in Poppe's works is identical to anything else. His music appeals to the attention and sensitivity of the listener for those small and smallest differences. The core sentence “the same is not the same” therefore not only applies to his music, but is also aimed as a message at us listeners.Because even outside of music, no place is like the other and every day is infinitely rich and different in detail, because nothing in the world or in life is exactly repeated. You just have to recognize this wealth. And this is exactly what Enno Poppe's music sensitizes to: Carpe diem!

Contribution to the musicological symposium “Composition as an Experiment: Enno Poppe”, which was organized by Jörg Birkenkötter and Till Knipper on November 28 and 29, 2013 at the Bremen University of the Arts by the New Music Studio as part of the “Bremen Podiums”.

1 Enno Poppe, quoted after “Attention and comprehensibility. Armin Köhler in conversation with Enno Poppe ”, in: Program book of the Donaueschinger Musiktage 2013, published by the Gesellschaft der Musikfreunde Donaueschingen eV, Donaueschingen 2013, 55.
2 Enno Poppe, quoted from Bernd Künzig, “Enno Poppe - Portrait of a Composer as a Young Materialist”, manuscript for the SWR 2 OPER broadcast on May 13, 2012.
3 This statement by Enno Poppe, as well as all other quotes in italics that are not further marked, come from a conversation the author had with Enno Poppe on April 22, 2014 in Cologne.
4 Theodor W. Adorno: "Form in der Neue Musik" (= Darmstadt Contributions to New Music Volume 10), edited by Ernst Thomas, Mainz: Schott, 1966, 19.
5 Ibid, 10 and 19.
6 Enno Poppe, quoted from “Attention and comprehensibility”, see note 1, 58.
7 Ibid, 57 and following pages.
8 Enno Poppe, quoted from “Attention and comprehensibility”, see Notes 1, 60 and 62
9 musica viva, season brochure 2010/2011, Munich: Bayerischer Rundfunk, 4.
10 Enno Poppe, quoted after “Attention and comprehensibility”, see note 1, 60.
