Gérard Grisey - Les Espaces Acoustiques (1974-85)
    - 2 acoustic points of reference: the overtone spectrum and periodicity
    - no more composing with notes but rather with tones;
    - controlling the differences, i.e. developing (or not developing) the tone and speed of its deve- lopment;
    - taking into account the relativity of our percep- tions;
    - applying phenomena that have long been studied in electronic studios to the area of instrumental sound. These applications may be heard in their more radical forms in Partiels and Modulations;
    - striving for a synthetic style in which various pa- rameters contribute to the construction of a single sound. For example: the structure of un-tempered pitches results in the creation of new tone colours, giving rise to certain structures of duration, etc. The synthesis involves the creation of sounds (sub- stance), on the one hand, and relationships among the tones (form), on the other.


1. Prologue (1976) for viola solo
    version with live electronics / resonators
        https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LFUomn9Fp_k
    Melodies may be perceived and memorised in two different ways: based on their constituent tones or based on their structure, the form of the melodic curve. Prologue is oriented towards this second type of listening. It contains a melodic silhouette and transformations that continually return in a type of spiral. The exact contours of these silhouettes undergo continual change as the pitches gradually depart from the original spectrum finally transforming into noise as they grow increasingly inharmonic. The melodic silhouette determines the overall form, the tempi, and the emergence of two types of insertions: the heart beat (short/long) and the echo. A single voice, combined with an abstract and uncompromising structure – this is my attempt to express what for me is the essence of music: the dialectics between noise and form.


2. Périodes (1974) for seven musicians
    In Périodes, there are three types of moments: dynamic/expansion, dynamic/contraction and static/periodic, analogous to human respiration: inhalation, exhalation, and rest. Periodicity is experienced here as a real weight, a pole where the absence of new energy makes us literally turn in circles before an anomaly is discovered that provides the seed for a new development, a new excursion. The periodicity is not like the one generated by a synthesizer, however: I would describe it as “fuzzy”, never precise and yet periodic, like our heart and our gait, with a fluctuating margin of free-play that makes it interesting.
    Périodes is an intimate work in which the string quartet plays an extraordinary, delicate role. Among other things, we should notice:
    - the first “inhalation”, where the instruments surround the “D” of the viola with a spectrum and then gradually depart from it with tone complexes increasingly remote from their original spectrum;
    - the second “inhalation“, purely rhythmic in nature (the transition from periodic to aperiodic), arising from the heartbeat;
    - a section in which a specific playing technique is used in the strings, allowing them to change progressively from a highly diverse harmonic complex to a very simple colouring of the fundamental.
    Regarding the time structures, they are derived exclusively from the spectrum of odd overtones that is used in this piece.


3. Partiels (1975) for 18 musicians
    The title refers to both a part of a larger work and to partial tones of a sound as in acoustics.
    Two traits characterise the development of sounds: periodicity and the overtone spectrum. These elements, which are very easy to identify, give the piece continuity and a dynamic that corresponds rather closely to the cyclical form of human respiration (inhalation, exhalation and rest) or tension/ collapse – relaxation – collection of energy).
    Many sections of Partiels anticipate the technique of instrumental synthesis. Just as auditory synthesis, which is used in digital electronic music programmes, this technique relies on the instrument (micro-synthesis) to express the various components of sound in order to achieve a new global synthesis (macro-synthesis). As a result of this process, the various original instrumental sounds vanish from our perceptions, giving way to a newly invented, synthetic tone colour. This gradual blending process makes it possible to formulate a whole series of colour tones and establish relationships among them, from the overtone spectrum to various spectra with inharmonic partials and even white noise.


4. Modulations (1976-77) for 33 musicians
    In Modulations, the substance does not exist in and of itself. Rather, it dissolves into a process of musical flow and becoming that constantly changes and cannot be captured at any one moment; everything is in flux.
    The only points of reference in this slow yet dynamic flow are the overtone spectrum of an „E“ (41.2 Hz) and periodic durations. These fixed points are extremely important for our perception, since they allow us to estimate the measured distances, the degree of dissonance of an interval or a tone complex, and the aperiodic nature of the durations. The form of this piece is the story of the very tones of which it consists. The sound parameters are oriented and guided so that several modulation processes emerge, many based on the discoveries of acoustics: overtone spectra, partial tone spectra, formants, passing notes, differential tones, white noise, filtering, etc. By analysing the sonogram of brass instruments and their mutes, I was able to build their tone colours synthetically or, on the contrary, to distort them. The sound of the brass instruments was also very important for the concept of Modulations.
    Since the focus of attention is not always the substance but rather an “emptiness”, a distance that separates one given moment from the next (the degree of change or development), I believe that I have come a bit closer to real time: psychological time with its relative values rather than chronometric time.
    Despite the continuity of development, it is possible to perceive or outline five processes and one interruption, the durations of which are proportional to the intervals of the spectrum of the odd overtones.
        1. Tension/Relaxation:
        Homophony: two twins chords (complex with additional notes) change from the heterogeneous to the homogeneous, from aperiodic to periodic durations.
        2. Relaxation/Tension:
        Homophony – polyphony - homophony: transition from the binary to the complex, followed by interruption and silence.
        3. Tension/Relaxation:
        increasingly fuzzy homophony: development from ring modulations on various levels to an absence of modulations. The development of passing tones.
        4. Relaxation/Tension:
        Homophony/heterophony: (two-voice) heterophony from block (four-voice) homophony. This process uses various filtered overtone spectra that develop into complete inharmonic spectra. The fundamental tones develop in the reverse direction.
        5. Relaxation/Tension:
        Transition from the binary to the undifferentiated through a gradual meltdown into white noise, with inverted cymbals, a reversal of the moment when the “poor” percussionist appears at the end of Partiels...


5. Transitoires (1980-81) for large orchestra
    This piece was composed when I was studying in Berlin on a grant from the German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD). Whereas Prologue and Périodes challenge the string-players, and Partiels the woodwinds and brass, the great difficulty of Transitoires is for the conductor, who has to handle extremely complex rhythms.
    With their broad acoustic space, Transitoires, and later Epilogue, achieve what was already latent in the other pieces of the cycle. The filter is removed, time is drawn apart, the spectra explode into 55 overtones, and true spectral polyphony runs the gamut of the tonal space.
    This piece has the same starting material, the same force fields and the same processes as the previous ones. Many allusions are made to events that appeared in Partiels, but the melodic pattern from Prologue is also present, along with the distortions of Périodes and the filtered spectra from Modulations.
    Apart from the previously mentioned techniques of using instrumental spectra and their passing tones and combinations, the piece also makes use of an instrumental application of frequency modulation to layer the inharmonic spectra.
    Recollection, return, and a new start: Transitoires reveals unsuspected aspects of the material that converge into a “primary” melody”, a sort of lullaby, taken from the Prologue.


6. Epilogue (1985) for four horns and large orchestra
    Epilogue is the only piece in the cycle that cannot be played separately. Rather, it concludes Transitoires. Is it an end? I doubt it. I arbitrarily had to interrupt an “entropic” process” which was gradually attacking the open system of Espaces Acoustiques.
    The solo horns once again take up the material from Prologue and are layered through a process of filtering and decomposition of the overtone spectrum of an “E”. This means that I introduce a dualism here that destroys the system: discursive time of language is added to the collective, magical time of the cosmos, the individual.



Vortex Temporum
    https://brahms.ircam.fr/fr/works/work/8977/

    Abolish the material in favor of pure duration is a dream that I have been pursuing for many years. Vortex Temporum is perhaps only the story of an arpeggio in space and time, below and beyond our auditory window and that my memory has left swirling over the months devoted to the writing of this play.

    Vortex Temporum (Tourbillon de temps) defines the birth of a formula of whirling and repeated arpeggios and its metamorphosis in different temporal fields. I have tried here to expand on some of my recent research on the application of the same material at different times.

    3 sound gestalts:
        1. an original event (the sine wave) and two adjacent events (the attack with or without resonance and the sustained sound with or without crescendo)
        2. three different spectra: harmonic, “stretched” inharmonic and “compressed” inharmonic
        3. three different times: ordinary, more or less dilated and more or less contracted... these are the archetypes that govern Vortex Temporum

    In addition to the initial whirlwind formula directly taken from Daphnis and Chloé , the vortex suggested to me a harmonic writing centered on the four notes of the diminished seventh, a rotary chord par excellence

    a note becomes timbre, 
    a chord becomes complex spectral and 
    a rhythm a swell of unpredictable durations.

    3 movements:
        - The three sections of the first movement, dedicated to Gérard Zinsstag , develop three aspects of the original wave, well known to acousticians: the sine wave (vortex formula), the square wave (dotted rhythms) and the tooth wave. saw (piano solo). They unfold a time that I would describe as jubilant, a time of articulation, rhythm and human breathing. Only the piano section takes us to the limits of virtuosity.
        - The second movement, dedicated to Salvatore Sciarrino , uses identical material in expanded time. The initial Gestalt is understood here only once, spread over the entire duration of the movement. I sought to create in the slowness a sensation of spherical and vertiginous movement. The ascending movements of the spectra, the interlocking of the fundamentals in chromatic descents and the continuous filtering of the piano generate a kind of double rotation, a helicoidal and continuous movement which rolls up on itself.
        - In the first movement which develops in discontinuity the different wave types, the third movement, dedicated to Helmut Lachenmann, opposes a long process allowing to create between the different sequences the interpolations which seemed unthinkable. Continuity imposes itself little by little and with it, the dilated time which has become a sort of large-scale projection of the events of the first movement. The metric already mistreated during the first movement is here often drowned in the vertigo of pure duration. The spectra at the origin of the harmonic discourse and already developed in the second movement spread out here in order to allow the listener to perceive its texture and to penetrate into another temporal dimension. The contracted time also makes its appearance in the form of dazzling saturations and makes it possible to re-hear the sequences of the third movement on a different scale.
